THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
(As amended by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019)

CHAPTER I — PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement
(1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Section 2. Definitions
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "certificate of fitness" means a certificate issued under section 56;
(b) "certificate of registration" means a certificate issued under section 41;
(c) "conductor's licence" means the licence issued under section 12 to a conductor of a stage carriage;
(d) "contract carriage" means a motor vehicle which carries a passenger or passengers for hire or reward and is engaged under a contract;
(e) "driver" includes the person for the time being in charge of a motor vehicle;
(f) "driving licence" means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter II authorising the person specified therein to drive;
(g) "goods carriage" means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the carriage of goods;
(h) "heavy goods vehicle" means any goods carriage the gross vehicle weight of which exceeds 12,000 kilograms;
(i) "heavy passenger motor vehicle" means any public service vehicle or private service vehicle or educational institution bus which is constructed or adapted to carry more than twelve passengers;
(j) "invalid carriage" means a motor vehicle specially designed and constructed for the use of a person suffering from some physical defect;
(k) "learner's licence" means the licence issued under section 8;
(l) "licensing authority" means an authority empowered to issue driving licences under this Act;
(m) "light motor vehicle" means a transport vehicle or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of either of which does not exceed 7,500 kilograms;
(n) "manufacturer" means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of motor vehicles;
(o) "motor cab" means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry not more than six passengers excluding the driver for hire or reward;
(p) "motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon roads;
(q) "omnibus" means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six persons excluding the driver;
(r) "owner" means a person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered;
(s) "permit" means a permit issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority authorising the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle;
(t) "public place" means a road, street, way or other place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which the public have a right of access;
(u) "registering authority" means an authority empowered to register motor vehicles under Chapter IV;
(v) "stage carriage" means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers excluding the driver for hire or reward at separate fares;
(w) "State Government" includes a Union territory administration;
(x) "transport vehicle" means a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational institution bus or a private service vehicle.

CHAPTER II — LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES

Section 3. Necessity for driving licence
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place unless he holds an effective driving licence issued to him authorising him to drive the vehicle.

Section 4. Age limit in connection with driving of motor vehicles
(1) No person under the age of eighteen years shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place.
(2) No person under the age of twenty years shall drive a transport vehicle in any public place.

Section 5. Responsibility of owners of motor vehicles for contravention of sections 3 and 4
No owner or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or permit any person who does not satisfy the provisions of section 3 or section 4 to drive the vehicle.

Section 6. Restrictions on the holding of driving licences
(1) No person shall hold two or more effective driving licences.
(2) No person under the age of sixteen years shall hold a licence to drive a motor vehicle of any class.

Section 7. Restrictions on the granting of learner's licences for certain vehicles
No learner's licence to drive a transport vehicle shall be granted to a person unless he has held a driving licence to drive a light motor vehicle for at least one year.

Section 8. Grant of learner's licence
(1) Any person who is not disqualified under section 4 may apply to the licensing authority for the issue to him of a learner's licence.

Section 9. Grant of driving licence
(1) Any person who is not disqualified under section 4 for driving a motor vehicle and who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence may apply to the licensing authority for the issue to him of a driving licence.

Section 10. Form and contents of licences to drive
(1) Every learner's licence and driving licence shall be in the prescribed form and shall contain the prescribed particulars.

CHAPTER VIII — CONTROL OF TRAFFIC

Section 112. Limits of speed
(1) No motor vehicle shall be driven at a speed exceeding the maximum speed or below the minimum speed fixed for the area or road by the State Government.

Section 113. Limits of weight and limitation on use
No person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any public place any motor vehicle which is loaded in contravention of rules made by the Central Government.

Section 116. Power to erect traffic signs
The State Government or any authority authorised in this behalf by the State Government may cause or permit traffic signs to be placed on or near any road.

Section 118. Driving regulations
The State Government may make rules for regulating driving and riding of motor vehicles generally.

Section 119. Duty to obey traffic signs
Every driver of a motor vehicle shall drive the vehicle in conformity with any indication given by mandatory traffic signs.

Section 120. Vehicles with left hand control
No person shall drive any motor vehicle with a left-hand steering-control in any public place unless the vehicle is equipped with a direction-indicator.

Section 122. Leaving vehicle in dangerous position
No person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or allow the vehicle to remain at rest on any road in such a position or condition or circumstances as to cause or likely to cause danger, obstruction or undue inconvenience to other users of the road.

Section 125. Restrictions on pillion riding
No driver of a two-wheeled motorcycle shall carry more than one person in addition to himself on the motorcycle.

Section 128. Safety measures for drivers and pillion riders
(1) Every driver of, and every person riding on, a two-wheeled motorcycle shall, while in a public place, wear protective headgear conforming to the standards of Bureau of Indian Standards.
(2) The driver of every motor vehicle and every person sitting beside or behind the driver shall wear a seatbelt while the vehicle is in motion.

Section 129. Wearing of protective headgear
Every person driving or riding (otherwise than in a side car, on a motor cycle of any class or description) shall, while in a public place, wear protective headgear conforming to the standards of Bureau of Indian Standards.

Section 130. Duty to produce licence and certificate of registration
(1) The driver of a motor vehicle in any public place shall, on being so required by a police officer in uniform authorised in this behalf, produce his driving licence for examination.
(2) The driver shall also produce the certificate of registration of the vehicle.
(3) The driver shall also produce the certificate of insurance.

Section 131. Duty of driver to stop in certain cases
The driver of a motor vehicle shall stop the vehicle when required to do so by a police officer in uniform and shall remain stationary so long as may reasonably be necessary.

Section 132. Duty of driver in case of accident and injury to a person
When any person is injured or any property of a third party is damaged as a result of an accident in which a motor vehicle is involved, the driver shall take all reasonable steps to secure medical attention for the injured person.

CHAPTER XIII — OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE

Section 177. General provision for punishment of offences
Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence be punishable for the first offence with a fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence with a fine which may extend to fifteen hundred rupees.
[As amended by 2019 Act: First offence Rs 500, second or subsequent offence Rs 1,500]

Section 177A. General provision for contravention of road regulations
Whoever contravenes any provision of rules made under this Act relating to road regulations shall be punishable with a fine of five hundred rupees for the first offence and one thousand five hundred rupees for second or subsequent offence.

Section 178. Penalty for travelling without pass or ticket and for refusal to ply contract carriage, etc.
Whoever, being a passenger in a stage carriage, refuses or fails to pay the fare legally demanded, or being a person having charge of a contract carriage, refuses to ply the same without reasonable excuse shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

Section 179. Disobedience of orders, obstruction and refusal of information
(1) Whoever wilfully disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or authority empowered under this Act to give such direction, or obstructs any person or authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or authority is required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act to supply any information, wilfully withholds such information or gives information which he knows to be false or which he does not believe to be true shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both.

Section 180. Allowing unauthorised persons to drive vehicles
Whoever, being the owner or person in charge of a motor vehicle, causes or permits any other person who does not hold a valid driving licence to drive the vehicle shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine of five thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 181. Driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 or section 4
Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any public place in contravention of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine of five thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 182. Offences relating to licences
(1) Whoever, being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence by an order under this Act, drives a motor vehicle in a public place or applies for or obtains a driving licence, or whoever drives a motor vehicle in a public place in contravention of the conditions of his driving licence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine of ten thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 182A. Penalty for oversize vehicles
Whoever drives or causes or allows to be driven in any public place a motor vehicle which violates the standards prescribed relating to the size of the motor vehicles shall be punishable with a minimum fine of five thousand rupees.

Section 182B. Penalty for overloading
Whoever causes or allows to be loaded any motor vehicle subject to such conditions as to loading as may be prescribed and such vehicle is loaded in contravention of such conditions, shall be punishable with a fine of two thousand rupees and an additional fine of one thousand rupees per extra tonne.

Section 183. Driving at excessive speed, etc.
(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred to in section 112 shall be punishable with a fine of two thousand rupees for the first offence and four thousand rupees for the second or subsequent offence.
(2) In the case of a medium goods vehicle or a heavy goods vehicle or medium passenger motor vehicle or heavy passenger motor vehicle, whoever drives such vehicle in contravention of speed limits shall be punishable with a fine of four thousand rupees for the first offence and eight thousand rupees for the second or subsequent offence.

Section 184. Driving dangerously
Whoever drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances of the case including the nature, condition and use of the place where the vehicle is driven, the amount of traffic which actually is at the time, or which might reasonably be expected to be, in the place and the condition of the vehicle, shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine of five thousand rupees or with both, and for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with both.

Section 185. Driving by a drunken person or by a person under the influence of drugs
Whoever, while driving, or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle has in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg. per 100 ml. of blood detected in a test by a breath analyser, shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both; and for a second or subsequent offence, if committed within three years of the commission of the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine of fifteen thousand rupees or with both.

Section 186. Driving when mentally or physically unfit to drive
Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any public place when he is to his knowledge suffering from any disease or disability calculated to cause his driving to be a source of danger to the public, shall be punishable for the first offence with fine of one thousand rupees and for a second or subsequent offence with fine of two thousand rupees.

Section 189. Racing and trials of speed
Whoever without the written consent of the State Government permits or takes part in a race or trial of speed of any kind between motor vehicles in any public place shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine of five thousand rupees or with both, and for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with both.

Section 190. Using vehicle in unsafe condition
(1) Whoever drives or causes or allows to be driven in any public place any motor vehicle which is in such a condition that its use involves danger to the public or which does not comply with the prescribed requirements, shall be punishable for the first offence with fine of five thousand rupees and for second or subsequent offence with fine of ten thousand rupees.

Section 192. Using vehicle without registration
(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of section 39 shall be punishable for a first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine of five thousand rupees or with both, and for a second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with both.

Section 192A. Using vehicle without permit
Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 66 or in contravention of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which the vehicle may be used, shall be punishable for the first offence with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less than three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both.

Section 194. Driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight / without insurance
Whoever drives a motor vehicle without a valid policy of insurance shall be punishable with fine of two thousand rupees for first offence and four thousand rupees for second or subsequent offence.

Section 194A. Penalty for not wearing seat belt
Whoever drives a motor vehicle without wearing a seat belt or carries passengers without seat belts shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees.

Section 194B. Penalty for not wearing protective headgear
Whoever drives a two-wheeled motorcycle without wearing a protective headgear conforming to the standards of Bureau of Indian Standards shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees and disqualification to hold licence for a period of three months.

Section 194C. Penalty for not providing way for emergency vehicles
Whoever fails to draw to the side of the road or to stop his motor vehicle on the approach of an emergency vehicle such as a fire fighting vehicle or an ambulance shall be punishable with a fine of ten thousand rupees.

Section 194D. Penalty for use of handheld communication devices
Whoever drives a motor vehicle while using a handheld communication device shall be punishable with a fine of five thousand rupees.

Section 194E. Penalty for not wearing seat-belt
Whoever, being a driver or person seated on the front seat or any seat of a motor vehicle, fails to wear a safety belt while the vehicle is in motion, shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees.

Section 196. Driving vehicle without valid fitness certificate
Whoever drives a transport vehicle without a valid certificate of fitness shall be punishable with a minimum fine of five thousand rupees.

Section 199. Offences by juveniles
Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a person who is under eighteen years of age, the guardian of such person or the owner of the motor vehicle shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with a fine of twenty-five thousand rupees. The registration of the motor vehicle shall stand cancelled.

DRIVER'S RIGHTS DURING A TRAFFIC STOP

Under Indian law, drivers have the following rights during a traffic stop:

1. Right to know the reason for being stopped - A police officer must state the reason for stopping you.

2. Right to see identification - You can request the officer to show their identification card and badge number.

3. Right to receive a proper receipt - If a fine is collected on the spot, you are entitled to an official receipt. Cash collection without receipt is illegal.

4. Right to pay at the court - Under Section 200 of the Motor Vehicles Act, you have the right to contest a challan in court rather than paying on the spot.

5. Right to not be harassed - Police cannot use abusive language, threats, or physical force during routine traffic stops.

6. Right to record - There is no law prohibiting you from recording a traffic stop interaction for your own protection, as long as you are not obstructing the officer.

7. Right to a written challan - All traffic violations should be documented through e-challan or written challan. Verbal fines are not legal.

8. Right against arbitrary detention - You cannot be detained beyond what is reasonably necessary for the traffic stop.

COMPLAINT PROCEDURES

If a driver believes they have been subjected to misconduct by a traffic officer, they may:

1. File a complaint through the Integrated Grievance Redressal System (IGRS) of the respective state.
2. File a complaint on the Public Grievance Portal (pgportal.gov.in).
3. Write to the Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police.
4. Approach the State Human Rights Commission if there has been a violation of rights.
5. File an RTI application to obtain information about the fine collection.

The complaint should include:
- Date, time, and location of the incident
- Badge number or identification of the officer
- Description of the misconduct
- Any evidence (photos, audio, video recordings)
- The relief sought
